    Man cannot be a sophist to his heart,
    He must look nakedly on his intent,
    Expose it of all shreds of argument,
    And strip it like a slave-girl in the mart.
    What though with speckled truths and masked confessions
    He still deceives awhile the outer sense?
    At barely half his honestys expense
    Still earns the worlds excuse for the worlds transgressions?

    His conscience cannot play the marshland elf,
    Confusing that poor midnight wanderer,
    His soul, with floundering lights and errant gleams.
    O what damnation man would deal himself
    If meeting her beyond his uttermost dreams
    He still could face his soul and lie to her.

    O spare me from the hand of niggard love
    That grasps at interest on what it lends,
    And sets cold counsel as a guard above
    The hoard it calculates before it spends.
    Such misers of the riches of the heart
    Bear their untested treasure to the grave,
    And miss the whole, striving to save the part,
    By the bare measure they have striven to save.

    Is it for pride in saying at the end:
    See, Life! I spent not all that thou hast given--
    Lo, this and this and this I did not spend!
    I stinted earth of bliss to add to heaven.
    Alas, poor fools! life only gave ye this
    Because earth has such need of heavenly bliss.

    Once, Love, be prodigal, nor look hereafter,
    Not though experience unrolls the years
    And bids thee count the cost of golden laughter
    In the dull coinage of leaden tears.
    O perjured wisdom! half-truth hedged with lies!
    That makes a common stake of joy and pain,
    When tears are mans most mortal certainties
    And every instants joy his heavenly gain.

    Ah, mystery that sowed our breath and being,
    What harvest wilt thou get of untilled powers?
    Why didst thou give us sight if not for seeing?
    Why if we dare not hear make hearing ours?
    Or why in lifes name this high passion of love
    But in lifes name its passionate height to prove?

    Wilt thou put seals on love because men say
    Love is a thing that certain time will steal?
    As well, since night is certain after day,
    Might men their eyelids to the noontide seal.
    Nay! even though that worn-out tale were truth,
    And love, dear love, were times assurèd dower,
    What profit canst thou get of cheated youth
    By paying usury before his hour?

    I will not hear the sorry tune of time,
    That bitter quencher of young blessedness.
    Not to have proved young rapture is the crime,
    Unproven it will be quenched no less, no less.
    And thou wilt to the earth at last, times scorn,
    Relinquishing a crown thou hast not worn.

    When all is said, we can but turn our eyes
    In helplessness on the miraculous heart
    And secretly dream opportunities
    That shall its untried force in motion start;
    But life that launched and left us lets us drift,
    Our mightiest dreams still lean on circumstance,
    The essence of pain and joy is in our gift
    But not its seasons of significance.

    We cannot by the strength of our desires
    Compel our destinies; we only feel
    That in our souls imperishable fires
    Are hungry for the anvil and the steel.
    But if life brings no metal to the flame
    What shall we fashion of it in lifes name?

    Certain among us walk in loneliness
    Along the pale unprofitable days,
    Hazarding many an unanswered guess
    At what vague purpose wastes us on our ways.
    We know that we are potent to create,
    We say, I could be such or such or such,
    And lo, indifferent death swings back the gate
    And life has never put us to the touch.

    So women with the aching will to bear
    Still to the barren grave must barren go,
    And men that might again like Titans dare
    Angelic secrets, die and nothing know.
    Alas! why were we born to woe and bliss
    If life had no more need of us than this?

    When I see two delay their wings at heaven
    To scan the creeping audience of the earth,
    I think the angelic hosts of life must even
    Break into tears of fire or furious mirth,
    That ever spirits nearly perfected
    Should count the cost of knowing themselves sublime,
    Setting the measurable years in dread
    Against their single flash of measureless time.

    So issues strange to nature are debated,
    Woven in nets and beaten into bars,
    While natures issue stands unconsummated
    Upon the very boundary of the stars;
    And souls whose unity had been divine
    Sundered shrink back from Gods to mans design.

    Alas, that ever lifes sleek counterfeit,
    Convention, should usurp lifes very throne,
    Setting about the bitter and the sweet
    Observances the soul disdains to own.
    It muffles up with bland expedient tongue
    The wise examination of the mind,
    Bribing the old and threatening the young
    And offering easy conduct to the blind.

    A handbook of few rules for many cases,
    One answer to more sums than it can prove,
    With prizes for apt scholars in its paces,
    A veil for knowledge and a ring for love;
    And this smooth text for any questioning heart--
    Know not, and be less than, the thing thou art.

    Love needs not two the render it complete,
    O certainly love needs not even one!
    Sweet singing wants no listener to be sweet,
    And unseen lights still proper to the sun.
    When sunlight falls upon unpeopled valleys
    No presence can increase or dim its fall,
    When nightingales sing in deserted alleys
    No ear can make the night more musical.

    If solitary into the light and song
    I come, I know I have my treasure whole,
    Yea, and still have it whole, although a throng
    Runs after me down paths whereby I stole,
    Yea, and still have it whole, though only one
    Should follow me--or none, beloved, or none.

    What is this anguish then that always stands
    Mingled in love, if love be loves sole end?
    O it is life still gasping his commands
    And crying love therein to stand his friend.
    Life drives us all whether we love or no,
    We are lifes purpose, he much less is ours,
    And we like panting beasts in harness go
    While his fierce needs make torments of our powers.

    Only when love across the heavy fields
    Divinely treads to labour with the clods,
    He breaks the goad that life is glad to yield,
    And lifts the yoke that bowed us to the sods:
    Upstanding, we behold a God revealed,
    And serve lifes purpose not like beasts but gods.

    A few of us who faltered as we fared
    Love has returned for. Still he leads us on,
    But where we walk the furrows are prepared
    And sown and fruitful, and the sowers are gone.
    O love, O love, the way too easy lies!
    Life on the rough horizon yonder goes,
    And when I call he will not turn his eyes,
    But with my brothers sows, and reaps, and sows.

    Life without love, O bitter, bitterest birth!
    Love without life still leaves us in our need.
    Ah, love, give up to me my patch of earth,
    My pinch of seed! Hast neither earth nor seed?
    Then whence these visions of thy presence born,
    These shining visions of flowers and fruit and corn?

    I hear love answer: Since within the mesh
    Of blood and flesh you labour for awhile,
    I, even I, must use you in the flesh,
    Leavening it of all the world calls vile.
    I am not natures force. O, she will forge
    Her indomitable end without my aid,
    And men cry out on her with rising gorge
    As though they were of other forces made.

    Not being her bond-slave, I alone can give
    Visions that are unmingled with her earth,
    But since this present in her habit you live
    I must meet nature to fulfil their birth.
    Only when you and I come clear of the clay,
    Beloved, I will fulfil them as I may.

    Thy glance is lovelier than the glance of the moon,
    Thy breath more heavenly than the breath of may,
    When thou dost gaze my sight begins to swoon,
    When thou dost breathe my own breath swims away.
    O love, with strange clear light, with strange dim breath,
    Thou dost pervade me, till all strength, all sense,
    Dissolve, it may be as they will when death
    Looses the soul from the bodys impotence.

    The stones I tread no longer solid are,
    These narrow houses all are built of air,
    Nay, are they on this star, or on that star
    Distantly trembling? Am I here or there?
    Love, love, I know not what is near and far,
    I am with thee and thou art everywhere.

    Now I have love again and life again
    By either hand, and cannot join their palms;
    For me they never will be one but twain,
    And I from each accept the barest alms.
    Lifes dole I scatter publicly, loves lies
    Unspent, unspent for ever in my heart--
    Poor heart, poor beggar of bleak charities
    From stores wherein it owns no proper part.

    Each knows me for his almsman in distress
    And brings his mercies to my famished door,
    But love asks not who doth my body dress,
    Nor life who stoops to clothe a heart so poor.
    Why do ye always come in singleness?
    Meet in me once, and I will want no more.

    Farewell, you children that I might have borne.
    Now must I put you from me year by year,
    Now year by year the root of life be torn
    Out of this womb to which you were so dear,
    Now year by year the milky springs be dried
    Within the sealed-up fountains of my breast,
    Now year by year be to my arms denied
    The burden they would break with and be blessed.

    Sometimes I felt your lips and hands so close
    I almost could have plucked you from the dark,
    But now your very dream more distant grows
    As my still aching body grows more stark.
    I shall not see you laugh or hear you weep,
    Kiss you awake, or cover up your sleep.

    O lovely life, how you have worn me out
    With asking naught and leaving me at large,
    Till my unmeasured strength begins to doubt
    If it could answer now your lightest charge.
    I am as weary as a child to-night
    And with my heavy lack of burdens bowed,
    And power and pride have ceased to stand upright,
    Wanting the cause to be powerful and proud.

    Passion is spent, and nothing was it spent on,
    And grief run dry of having no wounds to cure,
    And discontent that was the staff I leant on
    Is stifled by its final panting breaths.
    I have only patience left: such patience, sure,
    Is not lifes child and mine, but mine and deaths.

    My little dream, my momentary dream,
    My illimitable dream has slipt away.
    It came not like the morning, but the gleam
    In mornings van that is not night or day.
    But since my walls of ignorance are broken,
    Though on that desert knowledge builds no towers,
    I cannot say of life, he has not spoken,
    I cannot say of love, he has no powers.

    I have seen apparitions. I have heard
    Rumours within my souls profoundest cave.
    Movements remote and mighty have been stirred
    In my ancestral blood, while from the grave
    And womb of time strange thunders did arise
    That shook the throne of thought with prophecies.

    Shall we not laugh together, you and I,
    I being at last fulfilled, at last at rest
    Within the strength of your beloved breast,
    Shall we not laugh once at a day gone by
    When, wan as things that lie below the earth,
    Things choked and buried, sunless and unsought,
    This richest life was only lived in thought,
    Seed without fruit, unconsummated birth?

    Love, in that time when you have called me yours
    And have with kisses long outbreathed old fears,
    Love, let me not remember these! these hours,
    Save with one smile to drown their thousand tears.
    Then fold me in your bosom so deep away
    That memory cannot touch this loveless day.


