
Let others sing of Mars, and of his train,
Of great exploits, and honourable scars,
The many dire effects of Civil Wars,
Death's triumphs, and encomiums of the slain.
I sing the conflicts I myself sustain,
With her (Great Love) the cause of all my cares,
Who wounds with looks, and fetters with her hairs.
This mournful tale requires a tragic strain.
Eyes were the Arms, did first my Peace control,
Wounded by them, a source of Tears there sprung,
Running like blood from my afflicted soul;
Thou Love, to whom this conquest does belong,
Leave me at least the comfort to condole,
And as thou wound'st my Heart, inspire my Song.

O Love, who in my breast's most noble part,
Didst that fair Image lodge, that Form Divine,
In whom the sum of Heavenly Graces shine,
And there ingrav'dst it with thy golden dart.
Now, mighty Workman! Help me by thy art,
(Since my dull pen trembles to strike a line)
That I on paper copy the design,
By thee express'd so lively in my heart.
Lend me, when I this great attempt do try,
A feather from thy wings, that whilst to write,
My hand's employ'd, my thoughts may soar on high;
Thy Torch, which fires our hearts and burns so bright,
My darker fancy let its flame supply,
And through my numbers dart celestial light.

Now angry Juno sends from Heaven in spite
Rivers and Seas, instead of moderate showers
Horror invests the world, and the bright Hours
Of Delos' God, are chang'd to dismal Night.
So crowds of anxious thoughts on ev'ry side
Invade my soul, and through my restless eyes,
I shed such streams of tears, my heart e'en tries
Death's pangs, whilst I by force in life abide.
But the brisk gales, which rising by and by,
Where Sol at night in Thetis' lap shall lie,
Will make Heaven clear, and drive away the rain.
Ah, Cynthia! That the blasts or sighs I vent,
Could ease my breast of cloudy discontent,
Which still with fresh assaults renews my pain.

Come all ye Wits, that with immortal rhymes,
Glory to others, and yourselves, create:
And you that gratify the future times,
Whilst tales of Love and battles ye relate;
Come, turn your studies, and your eyes this way,
This theme will crown your heads with lasting bays,
'Tis Cynthia's beauty, Heavenly Cynthia;
Come swell your volumes all with Cynthia's praise.
Posterity will then your works admire,
And for her sake shall them as jewels prize,
All things to Cynthia's glory must conspire,
She shall be worshipp'd with the deities.
To her make foreign lands pay honours due,
Thus shall you live by her, and she by you.

Fair Cynthia mounted on her sprightly pad,
Which in white robe with silver fringe was clad,
And swift as wind his graceful steps did move,
As with his beauteous guide he'd been in love.
Though fierce, yet humble still to her command,
Obeying ev'ry touch of her fair hand;
Her golden bit his foaming mouth did check,
It spread his crest, and rais'd his bending neck.
She was the rose upon this hill of snow,
Her sparkling beauty made the glorious show;
Whence secret flames men in their bosoms took:
The Graces and the Cupids her surround,
Attending her, while cruel she does wound,
With switch her horse, and hearts with ev'ry look.

Whate'er the world could boast of fair or good,
Thy back with pride has borne, thou happy Horse,
By which thou'rt fall'n in middle of thy course,
Too feeble to sustain so great a load.
Oh happy fall! Oh dying full of bliss!
Whilst she that guided Love did guide thy head,
Big with this thought, thou willingly art dead,
Scorning another burden after this.
A Heaven of Beauty over-press'd thy back,
This might have made Alcides' shoulders crack,
And Atlas truckle under such a weight:
Heav'n thee amongst its horses long'd to see,
As here the world was late in love with thee,
When carrying her who to the sun gave light.

If Love it be not, what is this I feel?
If it be Love, what Love is, fain I'd know?
If good, why the effects severe and ill?
If bad, why do its torments please me so?
If willingly I burn, should I complain?
If 'gainst my will, what helps it to lament?
Oh living Death! oh most delightful pain!
How comes all this, if I do not consent?
If I consent, 'tis madness then to grieve;
Amidst these storms, in a weak boat I'm tost
Upon a dangerous sea, without relief,
No help from Reason, but in Error lost.
Which way in this distraction shall I turn,
That freeze in Summer, and in Winter burn?

Barefoot and ragged, with neglected hair,
She whom the Heavens at once made poor and fair,
With humble voice and moving words did stay,
To beg an alms of all who pass'd that way.
But thousands viewing her became her prize,
Willingly yielding to her conquering eyes,
And caught by her bright hairs, whilst careless she
Makes them pay homage to her poverty.
So mean a boon, said I, what can extort
From that fair mouth, where wanton Love to sport
Amidst the pearls and rubies we behold?
Nature on thee has all her treasures spread,
Do but incline thy rich and precious head,
And those fair locks shall pour down showers of gold.

Since, cruel Thyrsis, you my torments slight,
And take no notice of my amorous flame,
In these vermilion letters thus I write
My bloody reasons to confirm the same.
These of my passion are the lively marks,
Which from my veins you here in blood see writ,
Touch them, your breast will kindle with the sparks,
The ardent characters are reeking yet.
Nor can my pen alone my heart explain,
My very soul o'ercharg'd with grief, I fain
Would send enclos'd herein, the truth to prove.
And if I've been too sparing of my blood,
This is the reason why I stopp'd the flood,
I would not spoil the face I'd have you love.

Courted by Cupids, and the amorous air,
Upon a shady throne, at her repose,
She sate, than whom, none e'er so sweet or fair:
It was the Queen of Flowers, the blushing rose.
With no less pride, upon his bed of state,
A Lily, pale with envy, look'd that way;
With humble flowers, encompass'd round he sate,
And scorn'd the sceptre at her feet to lay.
To arms, with thorns and prickles, they prepare
And each designs to try it out by war;
Till on good counsel, they in rule combine:
So in your face, the lovely White and Red,
Cynthia, I see all quarrels banishéd,
And Rose and Lily do in empire join.

If Theban Pindar rais'd his country's fame,
Whilst its great deeds he does in odes rehearse,
And they made greater by his noble verse
In gratitude are trophies to his name:
Then English Pindar shall for ever live,
Since his divine and lofty poetry
Secur'd, great Regglo, by thy harmony,
Shall to itself immortal glory give.
The world's amaz'd to hear the sweet consent,
Betwixt thy charming voice and instrument,
They'd stop the bays which from Apollo fled;
Thy skilful notes would make in full career
Phoebus, the God of Music, stay to hear,
And with his Daphne crown thy rival head.

You, who to fam'd Guarini, now he's dead,
Your verses consecrate, and statues rear,
For that sweet Padan swan your tears have shed,
Sweetest that ever did, or will sing here.
Behold this picture on his fun'ral pile,
Your mournful spirits 'twill with joy revive,
Tho' th' artist cheats your senses all the while,
For 'tis but paint which you would swear does live.
This serves to keep our friend in memory,
Since Death hath robb'd us of his better part,
And that he so might live as ne'er to die,
He drew himself too, but with diff'rent art.
Judge, which with greatest life and spirit looks,
Borgianni's painting, or Guarini's Books.

I make no war, and yet no peace have found,
With heat I melt, when starv'd to death with cold.
I soar to Heav'n, while grovelling on the ground,
Embrace the world, yet nothing do I hold.
I'm not confin'd, yet cannot I depart,
Nor loose the chain tho' not a captive led;
Love kills me not, yet wounds me to the heart,
Will neither have m' alive, nor have me dead.
Being blind, I see; not having voice, I cry:
I wish for Death, while I of Life make choice;
I hate myself, yet love you tenderly;
Do feed of tears, and in my grief rejoice.
Thus, Cynthia, all my health is but disease;
Both life and death do equally displease.

I to Love's garden came, with my attire
Was wove with herbs of Hope, and of Desire,
Branches of Trouble too by me were worn,
Whose flowers and fruit were Prejudice and Scorn.
'Twas wall'd with Pain, and Anguish round about,
And from a thousand places issu'd out
Water of Grief and Air of Sighs, beside
Deceit and Cruelty, did there reside.
Pride was the Keeper; and to cultivate
Was Jealousy who still with mortal Hate,
Tare up my happiness ere it could grow;
Whilst, like a madman, thus I strive to sow,
Under the shadow of a thought that's kind,
I plough in stone, dig water, stop the wind.

I fill with sighs the air whene'er I stand
On yon' high hill, and thence survey the plain,
Where Laura, she who could my heart command,
Did in her Earthly Paradise remain.
For now she's dead, and left me here alone,
Griev'd for her loss, that I could gladly die;
Drowning my eyes in making of my moan,
My tears have left no space about me dry.
There is no stone upon that craggy hill,
Nor these sweet fields an herb or plant do bring,
Nor flower 'mongst all that do the valleys fill,
Nor any drop of water from the spring;
Nor beasts so wild, that in the woods do dwell,
But of my grief for Laura's death can tell.

Oh Death! without regard to wrong or right,
All things at will thy boundless rage devours;
This tender plant thou hast cut down in spight,
And scatter'd on the ground its fruit, and flowers.
Our love's extinct that with such ardour burn'd,
And all my hope of future pleasure dies;
Nature's chief master-piece to earth's return'd,
Deaf to my passion, and my grievous cries.
Sylvia, the tears which on thy sepulchre,
Hereafter shall be shed, or those now are,
Tho' fruitless, yet I offer them to thee,
Until the coming of th' Eternal Night
Shall close these eyes, once happy with thy sight,
And give me eyes with which I thee may see.

O Time! Oh rolling Heavens, that fly so fast,
And cheat us mortals ignorant and blind!
Oh fugitive Day, swifter than bird or wind!
Your frauds I see, by all my suff'rings past.
But pardon me, 'tis I myself must blame,
Nature that spreads your wings, and makes you fly,
To me gave eyes, that I my ills might spy:
Yet I retain'd them to my grief, and shame.
Time was I might, and Time is still I may
Direct my steps in a securer way,
And end this sad infinity of ill;
Yet 'tis not from thy yoke, O Love, I part,
But the effects; I will reclaim my heart:
Virtue's no chance, but is acquir'd by skill.

Vile Composition, Earth inspir'd with breath,
Man, that at first wert made of dust and tears,
And then by law divine condemn'd to death;
When wilt thou check thy lusts in their careers?
Change all thy mirth to sorrow, and repent,
That thou so often didst just Heav'n offend,
Deplore thy precious hours so vainly spent,
If thou wilt 'scape such pains as have no end.
The gaping grave expects thee as its right,
'Tis a strait place, but can contain with ease,
Honour, Command, Wealth, Beauty, and Delight,
And all that does our carnal senses please.
Only th' immortal soul can never die,
Therefore on that thy utmost care employ.

Th' unruly steed by laws to tame and ride;
With graceful course the well-pois'd lance to guide;
In martial sports ever to win the prize;
And troops with skill and judgement exercise:
In a calm breast a warlike heart to show;
To glory friend, to wantonness a foe;
To keep on Passion, Reason's powerful hand;
Over his soul, and self, to have command:
To sport with books, whilst arms aside he lays;
To interweave the olive with the bays;
When tir'd with arts, to tune Apollo's lyre;
To merit honours ere he them desire.
These fruits which others bring with art and time,
Your blooming age does yield before your prime.

Will spurs me on, Love wounds me with his dart,
Pleasure does draw me, Custom pulls me too,
Hope flatters, that I should my ends pursue,
And lends her right hand to my fainting heart.
My wretched heart accepts, nor yet espies
The weakness of my blind disloyal guide,
My Passions rule, long since my Reason died,
And from one fond Desire, still others rise.
Virtue and Wealth, Beauty and Graceful Mien,
Sweet Words, and Person fair as e'er was seen,
Were the allurements drew me to her net:
'Twas Thirteen hundred twenty sev'n, the year,
April the sixth, this Nymph did first appear,
And tied me so, I ne'er shall Freedom get.

Pleasure in thought, in weeping ease I find;
I catch at shadows, grasp air with my hand;
On seas I float are bounded with no land;
Plough water, sow on rocks, and reap the wind.
The sun I gaz'd so long at, I became
Struck with its dazzling rays, and lost my eyes;
I chase a nimble doe that always flies,
And hunt with a dull creature, weak and lame.
Heartless I live to all things but my ill,
Which I'm solicitous to follow still;
And only call on Laura, Love and Death.
Thus twenty years I've spent in misery,
Whilst only sighs, and tears, and sobs I buy,
Under such hard stars first I drew my breath.

Oh eyes! Our Sun's extinct, and at an end,
Or rather glorified in Heav'n does shine;
There shall we see her, there does she attend,
And at our long delay perchance repine.
Alas, my ears, the voice you lov'd to hear,
Is now rais'd up to the celestial choir;
And you, my feet, she's gone that us'd to steer
Your course, where you till death can ne'er aspire.
Cannot my soul nor body yet be free?
'Twas not my fault, you this occasion lost;
That seeing, hearing, finding her y' are crost:
Blame Death, or rather blest be ever He,
Who binds and looses, makes and can destroy,
And, when Life's done, crowns with Eternal Joy.

This Nightingale that does so much complain
Robb'd of her tender young, or dearest mate,
And to the fields and heav'ns her tale relate,
In such sad notes, but yet harmonious strain;
Perhaps this station kindly does retain,
To join her griefs with my unhappy state;
'Twas my assurance did my woe create:
I thought Death could not have a Goddess slain.
How soon deceiv'd are those, who least mistrust!
I ne'er could think that face should turn to dust,
Which, than all human beauties seem'd more pure:
But now I find that my malicious fate,
Will, to my sorrow, have me learn too late:
Nothing that pleases here, can long endure.

Hold, treacherous thoughts, that dare my rule despise,
Is 't not enough 'gainst me in war are join'd
Love, Fortune, and grim Death, but I must find
Within me such domestic enemies?
And thou, my heart, that dost my peace oppose,
Disloyal thou wilt give my soul no rest,
But harb'ring still these thoughts within my breast,
Keep'st correspondence with my deadly foes;
To thee Love all his messages conveys,
Fortune my now departed pomp displays,
Death in my mind does all my griefs express;
That my remains fall by necessity,
My thoughts with errors arm themselves in thee:
Thou art the cause of my unhappiness.

Why, Idol of my Heart, these mournful cries,
And so much grief on those fair cheeks appears?
From whence proceed those envious showers of tears,
Dark'ning the lustre of thy beauteous eyes?
How dares hold Sorrow labour to remove
So many graces from their proper place?
Ah, Cynthia! Pain endeavours, in thy face,
To poison all the sweetest charms of Love.
Sense of thy grief my soul with anguish fills,
Which out of pity into tears distills,
And for thy ease would fain endure thy woe!
But this affliction, sure thy heart sustains,
That, cruel Thou, being sensible of pains,
May'st to thy constant martyr pity show.

Near a cool fountain, on a rose-bed lay
My Cynthia, sleeping in the open air;
Whom Sol espied, and seeing her so fair,
Gaz'd, till his wanton coursers lost their way.
The proudest flowers were not asham'd to find
Their scent and colour rivall'd in her face;
Her bright curl'd hairs were toss'd from place to place,
On neck and bosom by the amorous wind.
Her smiles were animated by her breath,
Which still as soon as born receiv'd their death,
Being mortal made in pity to men's hearts:
Poor Lovers then did lie and take their rest,
For the Blind Boy who does our peace molest,
Had in her sleeping eyes hid all his darts.

I lov'd thee, faithless Man, and love thee still,
Thou fatal object of my fond desires,
And that which nourishes these amorous fires,
Is Hope, by which I love against my will.
Great was the passion thou didst late express,
Yet scorn'st me now, whom long thou didst adore,
Sporting with others, her thou mind'st no more,
Whom thou hast call'd thy Heav'n and happiness.
Think not by this, thy Lesbia thee invites,
To spend thy years in dalliance and delights,
'Tis but to keep her faith in memory;
But if to grieve my soul thou only strive,
To thy reproach, and to my boast I'll live,
A monument of thy INCONSTANCY.

With hairs, which for the wind to play with, hung,
With her torn garments, and with naked feet,
Fair Lydia dancing went from street to street,
Singing with pleasant voice her foolish song.
On her she drew all eyes in ev'ry place,
And them to pity by her pranks did move,
Which turn'd with gazing longer into Love
By the rare beauty of her charming face.
In all her frenzies, and her mimicries,
While she did Nature's richest gifts despise,
There active Love did subt'ly play his part.
Her antic postures made her look more gay,
Her ragged clothes her treasures did display,
And with each motion she ensnar'd a heart.

Unhappy I came from my Mother's womb,
As she, Oh blessed She! who gave me breath,
Having receiv'd the fatal stroke of Death,
By weeping friends was carried to her Tomb.
The sorrow I exprest, and grievous cries,
Love's tribute were, for her to Heav'n was gone,
My coffin, and my cradle, both were one,
And at her sunset, mine began to rise.
Wretch, how I quake to think on that sad day!
Which both for Life and Death at once made way;
Being gave the son, and mother turn'd to earth.
Alas, I die! Not that Life hastes so fast,
But that to me each minute seems the last,
For I, in Death's cold arms, receiv'd my Birth.

I dreamt by me I saw fair Venus stand,
Holding young Cupid in her lovely hand,
And said, Kind Shepherd, I a Scholar bring,
My little son, to learn of you to sing.
Then went away; and I to gain her praise,
Would fain have taught him all my rural lays,
How Pan found out the Pipe, Pallas the Flute,
Phoebus the Harp, and Mercury the Lute.
These were my subjects, which he still would slight,
And fill my ears with Love-Songs, day and night;
Of mortals, and of Gods, what tricks they us'd,
And how his mother Venus them abus'd.
So I forgot my pupil to improve,
And learn'd of him, by songs, the Art of Love.

Chaste Cynthia bids me love, but hope no more,
Ne'er with enjoyment,--which I still have strove
T' obey, and ev'ry looser thought reprove;
Without desiring her, I her adore.
What human passion does with tears implore,
The intellect enjoys, when 'tis in love
With the eternal soul, which here does move
In mortal closet, where 'tis kept in store.
Our souls are in one mutual knot combin'd,
Not common passion, dull and unrefin'd;
Our flame ascends, that smothers here below:
The body made of earth, turns to the same,
As Soul t' Eternity, from whence it came;
My Love's immortal then, and mistress too.

Help! Help! Ye Nymphs, whilst on the neighb'ring plain
Your flocks do feed, come and assistance bring;
Alas! Fair Cynthia's sick and languishing,
For whom my heart endures a greater pain.
Ye Syrens of the Thames, let all your train
Tune their shrill Instruments, and to them sing,
And let its flow'ry banks with echoes ring,
This may her wonted cheerful looks regain.
Ye herbs, that richest med'cines can produce,
Come quickly and afford such sov'reign juice,
As from her heart may all the pains remove:
But in her face if death would paleness give,
And Fate ordain that she in torment live,
Then let her suffer in the flames of Love.

My hairs are hoary, wrinkled is my Face,
I lose my strength, and all my manly grace
My eyes grow dim, my teeth are broke or gone,
And the best part of all my life is done;
I'm drown'd in cares, and often sigh and weep;
My spirits fail me, broken is my sleep
Thoughts of the gaping grave distract my head;
For in its paths, 'wake or asleep, we tread;
None can from it by art their feet restrain
Nor back, tho' wide its gates, can come again.
Then since these ills attend the life of man,
Let's make their burden easy as we can.
Cares are no cares, but whilst on them we think,
To clear our minds of such dull thoughts, let's drink.

Led by kind stars one ev'ning to the grove,
I spied my Cynthia in the Walk of Love;
Her heav'nly voice did soon salute my ears,
I heard, methought, the Music of the Spheres.
Those notes on all the birds had laid a spell,
And list'ning 'mongst the rest was Philomel;
Who thinking she, in credit, suffer'd wrong,
Strove, tho' in vain, to equal Cynthia's song
But when herself, in voice, outdone she knew,
Being griev'd, she ceas'd, and from her rival flew,
I stay'd and saw my fair walk round the tree,
And sing her triumph for the victory.
Thus whilst my ears were feasted with delight,
My eyes no less were charm'd at her angelic sight.

Why dost thou fly me thus? Oh cruel boy!
I am no wolf that would thy life destroy:
But a fond Nymph, admirer of thy face,
As Echo once of fair Narcissus was.
Thou e'en in dangers dost thy fancy please,
Striving with toil the hunted game to seize:
While wretched me, who languish for thy sake,
When in thy net thou dost refuse to take.
But I, alas, in vain attempt to find
Effects of pity in a hard'ned mind:
As soon the hare its hunters may pursue,
As I with prayers thy cruel heart subdue.
My pow'r, I see, cannot thy steps retain,
Thus led by sports, and wing'd by thy disdain.

Jove saw the sphere old Archimedes made,
And to the other Gods he laughing said,
"Such wondrous skill can crafty mortals get,
Of my great work to make the counterfeit?
Heav'n's and Earth's constitutions, fixt by Fate,
This Syracusan's art does imitate;
His various planets their just order have,
Keeping by springs the motions which he gave;
Thro' the twelve signs his Sun completes its years,
And each new month, his mock new-Moon appears;
Pleas'd with his World, this artist unconfined,
Boldly rules Heav'n in his aspiring mind.
No more Salmoneus' thunder I admire,
Here's one has ap'd all Nature's works entire."

The life we strive to lengthen out,
Is like a feather rais'd from ground,
Awhile in air 'tis tost about,
And almost lost as soon as found;
If it continue long in sight,
'Tis sometimes high and sometimes low,
Yet proudly aims a tow'ring flight,
To make the more conspicuous show.
The air with ease its weight sustains,
Since 'tis by Nature light, and frail;
Seldom in quiet state remains,
For troops of dangers it assail.
And after various conflicts with its foes,
It drops to Earth, the Earth from whence it rose.

No human thing in constancy will stay;
The learned Chian us'd of old to say,
Our life was frailer than the fading leaves;
Which Man forgets, and scarce its flight perceives
He harbours idle fancies in his brain,
Many which he from childhood did retain:
And whilst his vigour lasts, he's still inclin'd
To fill with trifles his unsettled mind;
On Age or Death ne'er thinks, nor takes he care
Health to preserve, or active limbs to spare.
We to more serious things our minds should give;
Youth hastes, and we have little time to live.
To weigh this well, is a material part,
This thought's of worth, record it in thy heart.

See, whilst thou weep'st, fair Chloe, see
The world in sympathy with thee.
The cheerful birds no longer sing;
Each drops his head and hangs his wing:
The clouds have bent their bosom lower,
And shed their sorrows in a shower;
The brooks beyond their limits flow,
And louder murmurs speak their woe:
The nymphs and swains adopt thy cares:
They heave thy sighs and weep thy tears,
Fantastic nymph! that Grief should move
Thy heart obdurate against Love.
Strange tears whose power can soften all
But that dear breast on which they fall.
