      ARISTE! soon to sojourn with the crowd,
        In soul abstracted must thy minstrel go;
        Mix in the giddy, fond, fantastic show,
      Mix with the gay, the envious, and the proud.
      I go: but still my soul remains with thee,
        Still will the eye of fancy paint thy charms,
      Still, lovely Maid, thy imaged form I see,
        And every pulse will vibrate with alarms.
      When scandal spreads abroad her odious tale,
        When envy at a rivals beauty sighs,
      When rancour prompts the female tongue to rail,
        And rage and malice fire the gamesters eyes,
      I turn my wearied soul to her for ease,
    Who only names to praise, who only speaks to please.


    Be his to court the Muse, whose humble breast
      The glow of genius never could inspire;
    Who never, by the future song possest,
      Struck the bold strings, and waked the daring lyre.
    Let him invoke the Muses from their grove,
    Who never felt the inspiring touch of love.
    If I would sing how beautys beamy blaze
      Thrills through the bosom at the lightning view,
    Or harp the high-tond hymn to virtues praise,
      Where only from the minstrel praise is due,
    I would not court the Muse to prompt my lays,
      My Muse, ARISTE, would be found in you!
    And need I court the goddess when I move
    The warbling lute to sound the soul of love?


    Let ancient stories sound the painters art,
      Who stole from many a maid his Venus charms,
    Till warm devotion fired each gazers heart,
      And every bosom bounded with alarms.
    He culled the beauties of his native isle,
      From some the blush of beautys vermeil dyes,
    From some the lovely look, the winning smile,
      From some the languid lustre of the eyes.
    Low to the finishd form the nations round
      In adoration bent the pious knee;
    With myrtle wreaths the artists brow they crownd,
      Whose skill, ARISTE, only imaged thee.
    Ill-fated artist, doomed so wide to seek
    The charms that blossom on ARISTEs cheek!


    I Praise thee not, ARISTE, that thine eye
      Knows each emotion of the soul to speak;
    That lillies with thy face might fear to vie,
      And roses can but emulate thy cheek.
    I praise thee not because thine auburn hair
      In native tresses wantons on the wind;
    Nor yet because that face, surpassing fair,
      Bespeaks the inward excellence of mind:
    Tis that soft charm thy minstrels heart has won,
      That mild meek goodness that perfects the rest;
      Soothing and soft it steals upon the breast,
    As the soft radiance of the setting sun,
    When varying through the purple hues of light,
    The fading orbit smiles serenely bright.



      Thou ruind relique of the ancient pile,
        Reared by that hoary bard, whose tuneful lyre
      First breathd the voice of music on our isle;
        Where, warnd in lifes calm evening to retire,
      Old CHAUCER slowly sunk at last to night;
        Still shall his forceful line, his varied strain,
        A firmer, nobler monument remain,
      When the high grass waves over thy lonely site;
      And yet the cankering tooth of envious age
        Has sapped the fabric of his lofty rhyme;
      Though genius still shall ponder over the page,
        And piercing through the shadowy mist of time,
      The festive Bard of EDWARDs court recall,
    As fancy paints the pomp that once adornd thy wall.


    As slow and solemn yonder deepening knell
      Tolls through the sullen evenings shadowy gloom,
      Alone and pensive, in my silent room,
    On man and on mortality I dwell.
    And as the harbinger of death I hear
      Frequent and full, much do I love to muse
    On lifes distempered scenes of hope and fear;
      And passion varying her camelion hues,
    And man pursuing pleasures empty shade,
      Till death dissolves the vision. So the child
      In youths gay morn with wondering pleasure smiled,
    As with the shining ice well-pleased he played;
    Nor, as he grasps the crystal in his play,
    Heeds how the faithless bauble melts away.



    As over the lengthend plain the traveller goes,
      Weary and sad, his wayward fancy strays
      To scenes which late he passed, haply to raise
    The transient joy which memory bestows;
    And oft, while hope dispels the gathering gloom,
      He paints the approaching scene in colours gay:
      So I, to cheer me in lifes rugged way,
    Or glance over pleasures past, or think of bliss to come.
      But ah! reflection vainly we employ
      On pleasures past, and fugitive the joy
    When the mind rests on hopes delusive power;
      Blest only they who present joys can taste,
      Nor fear the future, nor regret the past,
    But happy, as it flies, enjoy the present hour.



    Say, lovely fugitive, where dost thou dwell?
      Desired of all, and sought through every scene,
      In pomp of courts, and in the rural green,
    Lifes public walk, and hermits lonely cell.
    Thee, goddess! sought of all, but found by few,
      We seek in vain, bewildered as we go;
    Tired of the chace, man ceases to pursue,
      And sighing, says, thou dwellest not below.
    Does he not after fairy shadows run?
      Follows he not some wild illusive dream,
    Like children who would catch the radiant sun,
      Grasp at its image in the glittering stream?
    If right he sought, then man would meet success,
    For surely Virtue leads to happiness.


    Markst thou yon streamlet in its onward course?
      Markst thou the reed that on its surface floats?
      Lightly it drifts along, and well denotes
        The light impression on the youthful breast,
        Which, in lifes summer, transiently imprest,
    Glides over the mind, unfixd by stable force:
    But over the fading year, when winter reigns,
      Chill sleeps the stream, its wonted current stayed,
      And on its bosom, where of late it played,
    Frolic and light the reed infixd remains.
    Thus, when lifes wintry season, cold and hoar,
      Freezes the genial flow of mental power,
      The mind, tenacious of its gathered store,
    Detains each thought beloved, conceived in vernal hour.



    On the high summit of yon rocky hill,
      Proud Fame! thy temple stands, and see around
      What thronging thousands press; and hark! the sound
    That fires ambition: tis thy clarion shrill.
    Amid thy path the deadly thorn is strewed,
      And oft intwind around the wreath they claim;
      And many spurn at justice sacred name,
    And wade to glory through a sea of blood.
      Be mine to leave thy path, thy motley crowd,
      And, while to hear their names proclaimed aloud
    Upon the brazen trump, the throng rejoice,
      Ill court fair virtue in her humbler sphere,
      More pleased in calm reflections hour to hear
    The approving whispers of her still small voice.



    My friendly fire, thou blazest clear and bright,
      Nor smoke nor ashes soil thy grateful flame;
    Thy temperate splendour cheers the gloom of night,
      Thy genial heat enlivens the chilled frame.
    I love to muse me over the evening hearth,
      I love to pause in meditations sway;
    And whilst each object gives reflection birth,
      Mark thy brisk rise, and see thy slow decay:
    And I would wish, like thee, to shine serene,
      Like thee, within mine influence, all to cheer;
    And wish at last, in lifes declining scene,
      As I had beamed as bright, to fade as clear:
    So might my children ponder over my shrine,
    And over my ashes muse, as I will muse over thine.



    Ungrateful he who pluckt thee from thy stalk,
      Poor faded flowret! on his careless way,
    Inhaled awhile thine odours on his walk,
      Then past along, and left thee to decay.
    Thou melancholy emblem! had I seen
      Thy modest beauties dewed with evenings gem,
    I had not rudely cropt thy parent stem,
      But left thy blossom still to grace the green;
    And now I bend me over thy withered bloom,
      And drop the tear, as Fancy, at my side
    Deep-sighing, points the fair frail EMMAs tomb;
      Like thine, sad flower! was that poor wanderers pride!
    O, lost to love and truth! whose selfish joy
    Tasted her vernal sweets, but tasted to destroy.



    Ill court thy lone bowr, Sensibility!
      And mark thy lovely form, wild waving hair,
    Thy loosely flowing robe, thy languid eye,
      And all those charms which blend to make thee fair.
    Far from the madding crowd thou lovest to stray
      Recluse, and listen at the silent hour,
    When wildly warbling from her secret bowr
      The pensive night-bird pours her evening lay.
    Tis thine own minstrels melody is heard,
      And as her sad song, by the moons still beam,
    Dies softly on mine ear, more sweet I deem
      Her mournful note than song of blither bird;
    So more than beautys cheek of vermeil dye
    Charms thy soft downcast mein and tear-dewed eye.



    Nymph of the splendent eye and rosy cheek,
      Who erst from courts and luxury didst speed,
    And with thine elder sister, Temperance, seek
      The woodbind cottage on the daisied mead;
    There will I woo thee, for thou dwellest there
      Amid the sons of industry; thy smile
      Soothes every sorrow, cheers the hour of toil,
    And, blest by thee, sweet is their frugal fare.
    When the woods echo with the early horn
      Thou tripest the wild heath, clad in flowing vest,
      (While youthful zephyr wantons over thy breast)
    And, with blithe song, dost greet the blushing morn;
      The airy sprite, who over thy fair form roves,
      Thy beauty tastes, and, as he tastes, improves.



    Sad songstress of the night, no more I hear
    Thy softend warblings meet my pensive ear,
      As by thy wonted haunts again I rove;
    Why art thou silent? wherefore sleeps thy lay?
    For faintly fades the sinking orb of day,
      And yet thy music charms no more the grove.
    The shrill bat flutters by; from yon dark tower
    The shrieking owlet hails the shadowy hour;
      Hoarse hums the beetle as he drones along,
    The hour of love is flown! thy full-fledgd brood
    No longer need thy care to cull their food,
      And nothing now remains to prompt the song:
    But drear and sullen seems the silent grove,
    No more responsive to the lay of love.



    Hence, busy torturer, wherefore should mine eye
        Revert again to many a sorrow past?
    Hence, busy torturer, to the happy fly,
        Those who have never seen the sun overcast
      By one dark cloud, thy retrospective beam,
      Serene and soft, may on their bosoms gleam,
    As the last splendour of the summer sky.
      Let them look back on pleasure, ere they know
    To mourn its absence; let them contemplate
    The thorny windings of our mortal state,
      Ere unexpected bursts the cloud of woe;
      Stream not on me thy torchs baneful glow,
    Like the sepulchral lamps funereal gloom,
    In darkness glimmering to disclose a tomb.


